Add replace revision counter in longhorn engine enhancement document (#1710)
longhorn/longhorn: enhancements/20200821-add-revision-counter-disable-support.md

# Add Revision Counter Disable Support

## Summary

This enhancement adds revision counter disable support globally and individually per each volume with a logic based on latest modified time and total block counts of volume-head image file to select the most updated replica rather than the biggest revision counter for salvage recovering.

### Related Issues

https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/508

## Motivation

### Goals

> 1. By default 'RevisionCounterDisabled' is 'false', but Longhorn provides an optional for user to disable it.

Reviewer: It's better to call the setting `DisableRevisionCounter` (like `Disable Scheduling on Cordoned Node`) with the options `true` or `false`, or `RevisionCounter` with the options `enabled`/`disabled`.

Author: Sure. I will update it to 'DisableRevisionCounter'. Thanks.

And for the API compatibility issues, always check the 'EngineImage.Statue.cliAPIVersion' before making the call.

#### Disable Revision Counter

1. Add 'Volume.Spec.RevisionCounterDisabled' and 'Replica.Spec.RevisionCounterDisabled' to volume and replica objects.
2. Once 'RevisionCounterDisabled' is 'true', volume controller will set 'Volume.Spec.RevisionCounterDisabled' to true, and 'Replica.Spec.RevisionCounterDisabled' to true. And during 'ReplicaProcessCreate', this will be passed to engine replica process to start a replica without revision counter.
3. During 'ReplicaProcessCreate', if 'Replica.Spec.RevisionCounterDisabled' is true, it will pass extra parameter to engine replica to start replica without revision counter, otherwise keep it the same as current and engine replica will use the default value 'false' for this extra paramter. This is the same as the engine controller to set the 'salvageRequested' flag.
4. For engine controlloer starting cases:
- If revision counter is not disabled, stay with the current logic.
- If revision counter is disabled, engine will not check the synchronization of the replicas.

> #### Add New Logic for Salvage

Reviewer 2: In this part, it's better to follow the salvage workflow to clarify what will happen after the refactoring. And explicitly clarifying which part (`longhorn-engine/controller`, `longhorn-manager/engineapi`, `longhorn-manager/controller`) the modification is applied to will be more easy-to-understand.

Author: Sure, will update.

Once the revision counter has been disabled.

1. Add 'SalvageRequested' in 'InstanceSpec' and 'SalvageExecuted' in 'InstanceStatus' to indicate salvage recovering status.
2. The logic details of 'ReplicaList' with 'salvage' to get the most suitable replica for salvage.
- Based on 'volume-head-xxx.img' last modified time, to get the latest one and any one within 5 second can be put in the candidate replicas for now.
- Compare the head file size for all the candidate replicas, pick the one with the most block numbers as the 'Source of Truth'.
- Only mark one candidate replica to 'RW' mode, the rest of replicas would be marked as 'ERR' mode.

> 3. Update the logic in Volume Controller 'ReconcileVolumeState', when the volume is at 'allFaulted' state, set 'SalvageRequested' in 'InstanceSpec' to 'true' and start engine controller with 'salvageRequested' is 'true', and this will trigger the new logic during engine controller starting to get only one replica as 'RW' and mark the rest to 'ERR'. One this is one, set 'SalvageExecuted' to 'true' to indicate the salvage is done and change 'SalvageRequested' back to false.

Reviewer 2: During the auto salvage, longhorn-manager will still launch replicas first then launch the engine. And as I mentioned in the discussion, we need to consider what if some replicas cannot be launched.

Author: Yes, we have discussed this, and I think @yasker mentioned replicas couldn't be launched was a separate case which our current design also had this issue. If the replica can not be launched, then engine can not connect to them, they won't be selected as candidate for recovering, right?

Author: Hi Shuo, I have tried the steps per our discussion (kill the replica pods, and then delete one replica directory), I don't hit the issue that engine won't be up until all the replicas are up. So I think it's fine. Also I think this feature doesn't change previous behavior. Please let me know what you think. Thanks.

### Test plan

#### Revision counter disable option test case

Revision counter disbled option should return error if only Longhorn Manager got upgraded, not Longhorn Engine.

This is when user trying to disable revision counter with new Longhorn Manager but the Longhorn Engine is still the over version which doesn't have this feature support. In this case, UI will shows error message to user.

#### Revision counter disable options

Revision counter can be disabled globally via UI by set 'Setting' 'General' 'DisableRevisionCounter' to 'true'.

It can be set locally per volume via UI by set 'Volume' 'Create Volume''DisableRevisionCounter' to true.

It can be set via 'StorageClass', and every PV created by this 'StorageClass' will inherited the same setting:
```yaml
    kind: StorageClass
    apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
    metadata:
      name: best-effort-longhorn
    provisioner: driver.longhorn.io
    allowVolumeExpansion: true
    parameters:
      numberOfReplicas: "1"
      disableRevisionCounter: "true"
      staleReplicaTimeout: "2880" # 48 hours in minutes
      fromBackup: ""
```

> #### Salvage replica when revision counter disabled

Reviewer 2: Mention this test as a regression test.

3. For CSI driver, need to update volume creation API.
4. Add new parameter to 'ReplicaCreateProcess' to disable revision counter. And a new gRPC API for engine control to get this setting from replica.
5. Update Longhorn Engine Replica proto 'message Replica' struct with two new fields 'last_modified_time' and 'head_file_size' of the head file. This is for Longhorn Engine Control to get these information from Longhorn Engine Replica.
6. Add new gRPC API in Longhorn Engine Control for Longhorn Manager to get the most suitable replica for salvage from Longhorn Engine Control.
7. Check 'EngineImage.Statue.cliAPIVersion' is 4 before calling new gRPC APIs.

## Design

### Implementation Overview

This enhancement has two phases, the first phase is to enable the setting to disable revision counter. The second phase is the implement the new gRPC APIs with new logic for salvage.

And for the API compatibility issues, always check the 'EngineImage.Statue.cliAPIVersion' before making the call.

#### Disable Revision Counter

1. Add 'Volume.Spec.RevisionCounterDisabled' and 'Replica.Status.RevisionCounterDisabled' to volume and replica objects.

> 2. Once 'RevisionCounterDisabled' is 'true' either from global setting or individual setting, volume controller will set 'Volume.Spec.RevisionCounterDisabled' to true, and 'Replica.Status.RevisionCounterDisabled' to true. And during 'ReplicaCreateProcess', this will be passed to engine replica process to start a replica without revision counter.

Reviewer 2: Why not put `RevisionCounterDisabled` in `Replica.Spec`?

Author: Sure, will fix it. Thanks.

3. For engine control, it can get 'Replica.Status.RevisionCounterDisabled' from each replicas.
- If revision counter is not disabled, stay with the current logic.
- If revision counter is disabled, engine will not check the synchronization of the replicas.

> - If Mixed case, engine will not check the synchronation of the replicas. And print warning about it.

Reviewer 2: What's this?

Author: will clarify this part. Thanks.

4. Add new parameter to 'ReplicaCreateProcess' to disable revision counter. This probably won't have compatibility issue since it passed by arguments.
5. Add new gRPC API in engine control may have a compatibility issue when a new version Longhorn manager calling an old version Longhorn engine which doesn't have this new API. And this issue should be able to resolve by checking the 'EngineImage.Statue.cliAPIVersion' before the call.
- If 'EngineImage.Statue.cliAPIVersion' is less than 4, using salvage logic.Which clears the 'FailedAt' field.
- If 'EngineImage.Statue.cliAPIVersion' is not less than 4, Longhorn manager can call the new gRPC API to get the replica candidate for salvage.

#### Add New Logic for Salvage

Once the revision counter has been disabled.

> 1. The logic details of 'ReplicaList' with 'salvage' to get the most suitable replica for salvage.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean the command in `longhorn-manager/engineapi`?

Author: After discussion, let me take more look at this part.

> - Based on 'volume-head-xxx.img' last modified time, to get the latest one and any one within 5 second can be put in the candidate replicas for now.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean the engine process is responsible for figuring out the candidates? When all replica processes become ERROR, how does the engine process get this kind of info?

Author: After discussion, will think about this part. Thanks.

- Compare the block numbers for all the candidate replicas, pick the one with the most block numbers as the 'Source of Truth', if some other candidate replicas have the same block numbers, they can be keep in the candidate replicas, otherwise remove them from the list.
- Only return one candidate replica to the caller.
2. Update the logic in Volume Controller 'ReconcileVolumeState', when the volume is at 'allFaulted' state, get the candidate replicas for salvage from 'GetCandidateReplicas' function call. And mark the rest replicas as 'ERR' state.

### Test plan

> 

Reviewer 2: After skipping the longhorn engine starting check, adding a regression test would be better.
e.g.,
1. Disable the revision counter.
2. Kill the engine process during the data writing.
3. Verify the volume still works fine.
4. Repeat the above test multiple times.

#### Revision counter disable option test case

> Revision counter disbled option should return error if only Longhorn Manager got upgraded, not Longhorn Engine.

Reviewer 2: You mean disabling revision counter for old volumes will error out?

Author: Will update this part for clarification.

Reviewer 2: Remember to update this statement. And there is a typo `disbled `

# Add Revision Counter Disable Support

## Summary

This enhancement adds revision counter disable support globally and individually per each volume with a logic based on latest modified time and total block counts of volume-head image file to select the most updated replica rather than the biggest revision counter for salvage recovering.

### Related Issues

https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/508

## Motivation

### Goals

1. By default 'RevisionCounterDisabled' is 'false', but Longhorn provides an optional for user to disable it.
2. Once user set 'RevisionCounterDisabled' to 'true' globally or individually, this will improve Longhorn data path performance.
3. And for 'RevisionCounterDisabled' is 'true', Longhorn will keep the ability to find the most suitable replica to recover the volume when the engine is faulted(all the replicas are in 'ERR' state).

> 4. Also during Longhorn Engine starting, be able to connect to all the synced replicas and mark the out of synced replicas as 'ERR' state.

Reviewer: We might want to reconsider if it's possible if we disabled the revision counter.

## Proposal

Currently Longhorn Replica will update revision counter to the 'revision.counter' file on every write operation, this impacts the performance a lot. And the main purpose of this revision counter is to pick the most updated replica to recover the volume.

Also every time when Longhorn Engine starts, it will check all the replicas' revision counter to make sure the consistency.

Having an option to disable the revision counter with a new logic which selects the most updated replica based on the last modified time and the total block numbers of the replica, and removing the revision counter mechanism. These can improve the Longhorn performance and keep the salvage feature as the same.

> With the head file information, Longhorn Engine can still mark the out of synced replica as 'ERR' during the starting time.

Reviewer 2: Clarify how Longhorn can verify the out-of-date replica via the head file information.

Author: Will add more details there. thanks.

Author: @shuo-wu , per discussion with @yasker , so far we haven't think a good way to tell if any replica is out of sync if some of the latest writes are on the same block. We will skip the check for now. Please let me know if you have any good idea about this part. Thanks.

### User Stories

> Some user has concern about Longhorn's performance. And with this 'RevisionCounterDisabled' option, Longhorn's performance will be improved a lot. And give user better experience.

Reviewer: Remove `And give user better experience` since it's unclear what is `experience` referring to here.

Also, we can collect some preliminary performance data here.

Author: I will add a 'TODO' in this section, and update this part once we have the data.

### User Experience In Detail

> In Longhorn UI 'Setting' 'General', by default 'RevisionCounterDisabled' is 'false', user can set 'RevisionCounterDisabled' to 'true', this will apply to all the new volumes both from Longhoron UI or StorageClass.

Reviewer: Should be applied only to the volumes created by the Longhorn UI. StorageClass has a separate setting for that.

Author: Sure, will update this part.

User can also set 'RevisionCounterDisabled' for each individual volumes created by Longhorn UI or StorageClass, this individual setting will take higher priority than the global setting.

Once the volume has 'RevisionCounterDisabled' to 'true', there won't be revision counter file. And the 'Automatic salvage' is 'true', when the engine is fauled, the engine will pick the most suitable replica as 'Source of Truth' to recover the volume.

### API changes

1. Add 'RevisionCounterDisabled' global setting in Longhorn UI 'Setting' 'General'.
2. Add 'RevisionCounterDisabled' individual setting in Longhorn UI 'Volume' 'Create Volume' for each volume.
3. For CSI driver, need to update volume creation API.

> 4. Add new parameter to 'ReplicaCreateProcess' to disable revision counter. And a new gRPC API for engine control to get this setting from replica.

Reviewer 2: It seems that both instance manager gRPC API and the replica gRPC API need to be updated. Then you may need to clarify how to handle the compatibility issue in this doc.

Author: Let me think more detail about it and update it later. May need to sync with you. Thanks.

Reviewer 2: I think adding a new field in `replica/ReplicaGetResponse` is enough. We don't need a new separate engine GRPC API for it.

7. Check 'EngineImage.Statue.cliAPIVersion' is 4 before calling new gRPC APIs.

## Design

### Implementation Overview

This enhancement has two phases, the first phase is to enable the setting to disable revision counter. The second phase is the implement the new gRPC APIs with new logic for salvage.

And for the API compatibility issues, always check the 'EngineImage.Statue.cliAPIVersion' before making the call.

#### Disable Revision Counter

1. Add 'Volume.Spec.RevisionCounterDisabled' and 'Replica.Status.RevisionCounterDisabled' to volume and replica objects.
2. Once 'RevisionCounterDisabled' is 'true' either from global setting or individual setting, volume controller will set 'Volume.Spec.RevisionCounterDisabled' to true, and 'Replica.Status.RevisionCounterDisabled' to true. And during 'ReplicaCreateProcess', this will be passed to engine replica process to start a replica without revision counter.
3. For engine control, it can get 'Replica.Status.RevisionCounterDisabled' from each replicas.
- If revision counter is not disabled, stay with the current logic.
- If revision counter is disabled, comparing the head file size to mark the out of synced replica as 'ERR' state.

> - If Mixed case, use the head file size for the comparision. And print warning about it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If Mixed case, use the head file size for the comparison. And print warning about it.
```

Author: Will fix, thanks.

#### Add New Logic for Salvage

Once the revision counter has been disabled.

1. The logic details of 'ReplicaList' with 'salvage' to get the most suitable replica for salvage.
- Based on 'volume-head-xxx.img' last modified time, to get the latest one and any one within 5 second can be put in the candidate replicas for now.
- Compare the block numbers for all the candidate replicas, pick the one with the most block numbers as the 'Source of Truth', if some other candidate replicas have the same block numbers, they can be keep in the candidate replicas, otherwise remove them from the list.
- Only return one candidate replica to the caller.
2. Update the logic in Volume Controller 'ReconcileVolumeState', when the volume is at 'allFaulted' state, get the candidate replicas for salvage from 'GetCandidateReplicas' function call. And mark the rest replicas as 'ERR' state.

### Test plan

> ####TODO how to make engine to fauled state. One way is to failed to ping monitor, like connection or modifing the replica files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
####TODO how to make engine to a failed state. One way is to failed to ping monitor, like connection or modifying the replica files.
```

Author: Will fix, thanls.
